 Air Quality Detector:

📌 1. Introduction
Air pollution has become one of the most serious threats to human health and the environment in the 21st century. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), around 99% of the world’s population breathes air that exceeds recommended pollution limits, leading to millions of premature deaths every year. The effects of poor air quality range from mild respiratory irritation to life-threatening cardiovascular and lung diseases.

To tackle this growing concern, it is essential for people to have easy access to real-time air quality data. This project, titled Air Quality Detector, aims to provide exactly that. Built with Python and Streamlit, it is a simple yet effective web application that allows users to input a specific location’s latitude and longitude and instantly retrieve detailed air pollutant data from the OpenWeatherMap API. By displaying real-time pollutant component values, this app helps users understand what they are breathing and motivates them to make informed decisions about their outdoor activities.

🎯 2. Project Goals
The main goal of this project is to build a beginner-friendly tool that demonstrates how real-world data can be fetched, processed, and displayed interactively using Python. The app provides:

Instant Air Quality Readings: Users can input any coordinates to fetch up-to-date air pollution data.

Simple User Interface: With Streamlit’s intuitive web interface, anyone can use the app without technical knowledge.

Clear Component Breakdown: The app shows individual pollutant values such as CO, NO₂, O₃, SO₂, PM2.5, PM10, and NH₃.

Hands-On Learning: It helps new programmers learn API integration, JSON parsing, and building web apps with Python.

The Air Quality Detector also lays a foundation for larger projects in environmental monitoring, smart city applications, or public health dashboards.

⚙️ 3. How the App Works
The Air Quality Detector app is built around a few simple steps that tie together Python, Streamlit, and the OpenWeatherMap API.

Step 1: User Input
The app prompts the user to enter the latitude and longitude of the location they wish to check. This allows the app to remain flexible and usable anywhere in the world, as long as valid coordinates are provided.

Step 2: API Request
Once the user enters the coordinates, the app constructs a URL to query the OpenWeatherMap Air Pollution API, including the user’s coordinates and a valid API key. The API responds with real-time air quality data in JSON format.

Step 3: JSON Data Processing
The response is parsed as JSON, and the app extracts the components section, which contains measured concentrations of various pollutants.

Step 4: Displaying Results
When the user clicks the Submit button, the app displays the pollutant names and their corresponding concentration values. This information is shown neatly in the Streamlit web interface so users can easily interpret it.

📑 4. Core Technologies Used
The Air Quality Detector uses the following technologies:

Technology	Purpose
Python	Core programming language for logic and API requests
Streamlit	Lightweight framework for building web apps
Requests	Python library for sending HTTP requests to the OpenWeatherMap API
JSON	Format for receiving and parsing API data
OpenWeatherMap API	Provides real-time air pollution data

By combining these technologies, this project stays lightweight and easy to run on any machine.

📂 5. Project File Structure
bash
Copy
Edit
Air-Quality/
 ├── air_quality_detector.py   # Main Streamlit app script
 ├── requirements.txt          # Project dependencies
 ├── README.md                 # Quick start guide
 ├── LICENSE                   # MIT License
 ├── .gitignore                # Ignore Python cache, virtual env, etc.
✅ 6. Key Python Concepts
This small but complete project demonstrates several important Python skills:

API Integration: How to use requests to interact with REST APIs.

JSON Parsing: Converting JSON data into Python dictionaries for easy access.

User Input: Using Streamlit widgets like number_input and button.

Web App Development: Turning a Python script into an interactive web app without needing HTML or JavaScript.

Basic Debugging: Using print() and st.write() to check responses.

⚡ 7. How to Use the App
Using the Air Quality Detector is simple and does not require any setup beyond Python and a few packages.

Step 1: Clone the Repository

bash
Copy
Edit
git clone https://github.com/22A31A4320/Air-Quality.git
cd Air-Quality
Step 2: Install Dependencies

bash
Copy
Edit
pip install streamlit requests
Step 3: Add Your API Key
Replace the apikey variable in the Python script with your own API key from OpenWeatherMap.

Step 4: Run the App

bash
Copy
Edit
streamlit run air_quality_detector.py
Step 5: Use the Web UI

Enter latitude and longitude values.

Click Submit to see pollutant component values for that location.

📊 8. Example Output
For example, entering the coordinates for New Delhi might return:

bash
Copy
Edit
{'co': 183.45, 'no': 0.0, 'no2': 32.41, 'o3': 65.67, 'so2': 5.21, 'pm2_5': 92.32, 'pm10': 145.67, 'nh3': 12.5}
Each number represents the concentration in µg/m³. Users can interpret these values to decide whether the air is safe or if precautions like wearing a mask or limiting outdoor activities are needed.

📌 9. Learning Value
The Air Quality Detector is a great beginner project for:

Understanding APIs and HTTP requests.

Practicing data extraction and parsing.

Creating clean user interfaces with Streamlit.

Learning how real-world data connects Python to practical solutions.

Students can expand this project into a more complex tool by adding charts, location lookups by city name, or integrating maps.

📜 10. License
This project uses the MIT License, one of the most permissive licenses for open-source software. It allows users to freely use, modify, and distribute the code, even for commercial purposes, as long as credit is given to the original creator.

💡 11. Possible Improvements
There are many ways to take this project further:

Use geocoding to convert city names to coordinates.

Add AQI category interpretations (e.g., Good, Moderate, Poor).

Visualize pollutant levels with bar charts or gauges.

Send notifications if pollution levels are high.

Deploy the app to a public URL using Streamlit Cloud or Heroku.

Add caching to reduce API calls and save on quota usage.

✅ 12. Conclusion
In summary, the Air Quality Detector is a practical example of how modern APIs and Python tools can be used to tackle real-world challenges like monitoring environmental health. By combining a clean interface, simple code, and reliable data, this app demonstrates that programming can have a real impact on everyday life.

It’s an excellent stepping stone for beginners looking to practice Python, learn about REST APIs, and create interactive tools with Streamlit. At the same time, it shows how data-driven insights can empower people to make healthier, more informed decisions.

